Hello.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
So today we will carry on talking about derivatives.
NOTE CONF
What we will do, we will see some applications of
laws of derivatives and derivatives of special functions or logarithm
NOTE CONF
and all this.
But we will also talk about implicit implicit differentiation.
NOTE CONF
Who can tell me what this is.
What is implicit differentiation and when do we use it.
NOTE CONF
Oh gosh.
You should come and sit at the front.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That is all right.
NOTE CONF
Tell us.
I know.
NOTE CONF
Implicit differentiation is, I think, implicit.
No.
NOTE CONF
It's not.
What?
NOTE CONF
Wait.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Implicit differentiation is when, um, we do differentiation involving a,
NOTE CONF
um, implicit function.
For example, for example, if you have, um, say, uh,
NOTE CONF
the equation of a circle like x squared plus y
squared equals some constant, um, well you could um, do
NOTE CONF
it normally.
Um, you could um, apply the differentiation to both x
NOTE CONF
and y.
Um, except um with.
NOTE CONF
While differentiating the y, you multiply it by dy over
dx.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
So that's exactly it.
NOTE CONF
And that's exactly the example I have in the slides
now.
NOTE CONF
So the idea of implicit differentiation is something that allows
us to differentiate functions where I cannot separate the variables.
NOTE CONF
So the example of the circle is really an interesting
example because there's a quite simple process.
NOTE CONF
And it can show you, as we will see in
a minute, how by carrying out the implicit differentiation and
NOTE CONF
kind of changing the shape of the equation and carrying
out normal differentiation, we get to the same result.
NOTE CONF
So what are we going to do today.
So the first thing we'll think about we'll think a
NOTE CONF
little bit more about rules around the products of functions.
How do I differentiate the product of function of the
NOTE CONF
quotient?
I don't have it up there, but I'm sure it's
NOTE CONF
in the book or the composition of functions.
I think we saw already one exercise last week, nor
NOTE CONF
last week on Monday about composition of functions.
So we'll just go and do a little bit of
NOTE CONF
those as well.
But as I was saying, I want to talk a
NOTE CONF
moment about implicit differentiation.
And I want to go through the example that just
NOTE CONF
by chance, I assure you this is a coincidence that
your colleague mentioned.
NOTE CONF
So suppose I have a circle.
Suppose I want to calculate the slope of the tangent
NOTE CONF
to that circle at some point.
So the first thing I need to think about is
NOTE CONF
that if I want to do this with normal procedures,
like the things we have seen up to Monday, that
NOTE CONF
is not a function.
So I need to do something to it, right?
NOTE CONF
It's not a function, you remember?
Because if I apply the vertical test, the vertical test
NOTE CONF
fails a vertical line that cuts the circle cuts the
circle in two points, which tells me immediately that is
NOTE CONF
not a function.
However, I can consider some sections of this shape.
NOTE CONF
So for example, I can consider the upper the upper
circle by writing this function in the shape y equals
NOTE CONF
something.
And that is a perfectly good function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you apply the vertical test to this section
NOTE CONF
of the circle we are all happy.
So suppose I want to calculate the tangent line to
NOTE CONF
one to a point in that section.
I can just write the equation.
NOTE CONF
Is explicit form and this will become y.
If I want to just consider the top semicircle, this
NOTE CONF
will become y equal one minus x squared.
And then I can calculate the derivative in a standard
NOTE CONF
way as I calculate the derivative of questions.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So that's that's absolutely fine.
In fact that derivative is I can consider it like
NOTE CONF
a composition of functions, right where I have the A
quotient, and at the bottom I have a square root.
NOTE CONF
So I need to think about the derivative of the
square root.
NOTE CONF
But inside the square root I have another function.
So I need to apply the formula for the composition
NOTE CONF
of function.
And if you do all the calculations which I don't
NOTE CONF
want to do for this one, you get the point.
If you don't believe me, do the calculations and then
NOTE CONF
tell me.
So this is the standard way that we know how
NOTE CONF
to do.
What we were saying.
NOTE CONF
Before is okay, I don't want to do that.
I want to carry on with this idea of differentiating
NOTE CONF
implicitly.
And so basically what we do, we consider the differentiation
NOTE CONF
of x and y in a way together.
So if I have the equation of a circle my
NOTE CONF
circle was I think x squared plus y squared equal
to one.
NOTE CONF
I apply the rule of the of implicit differentiation.
session.
NOTE CONF
And this is the process.
This is around page 310 in your book.
NOTE CONF
I think there is a chapter dedicated to implicit differentiation.
And when I go to calculate the debt expression at
NOTE CONF
the point where I wanted to calculate the the slope
of the tangent.
NOTE CONF
Thankfully I obtained the same result.
Now obviously in a case like this, it is not
NOTE CONF
convenient to use implicit differentiation because it's much easier to
rearrange the function and consider just the part of the
NOTE CONF
function where I want it to go and calculate the
derivative.
NOTE CONF
But there are a lot of cases in which this
is not possible.
NOTE CONF
So where the algebraic expression is quite complex and it
is not possible to go and rearrange it in a
NOTE CONF
way.
Y equal.
NOTE CONF
And these are the cases where implicit differentiation comes in.
So this is like the topic for today.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
Oh I don't know what's going on.
NOTE CONF
Let's see some exercises.
So I'll put this up and I'll bring it up
NOTE CONF
here.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
So if you log in, I think it worked really
quite well on Monday.
NOTE CONF
Uh, have a look and then I'll switch.
I'll switch the book club off, and I'll give you
NOTE CONF
a little bit of time to think about.
About it.
NOTE CONF
Is everybody logged in?
Yeah, I can see it.
NOTE CONF
389 people.
Oh, okay.
NOTE CONF
People are still logging in.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Oh, wait until I start replying.
Come on.
NOTE CONF
There you are.
Okay, I'll give you three minutes, because this should be
NOTE CONF
really pretty straightforward.
And then we'll have we'll have a look at it.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Another question.
NOTE CONF
Thank.
You.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
So I need a few more boats.
NOTE CONF
Not even a fourth of the people logged in and
put it.
NOTE CONF
Down.
Okay, this should be pretty straightforward, so I'm quite happy
NOTE CONF
to to have to have a look.
So this is the.
NOTE CONF
The consensus.
And I think I'm I am happy to go with
NOTE CONF
that.
Somebody can explain to me why that's true.
NOTE CONF
So maybe I should qualify somebody in the bottom section
of the lecture theatre.
NOTE CONF
Can you explain to me why this is true?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what do we think?
Do you want to say.
NOTE CONF
So.
I mean, the reason for this is straightforward.
NOTE CONF
That is the definition of the derivative of that function
at that point.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If you remember we calculate the derivatives with limits.
NOTE CONF
And the limit is on the size of the increment
of the x of the x right.
NOTE CONF
So.
This is my definition of derivative.
NOTE CONF
I've just changed the point.
The unknown x with the with the value three.
NOTE CONF
And I've calculated the limit.
So that is exactly the definition of the derivative.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's go and have a look at next one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You have the text on the slide.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You need to understand that once you understand something.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Okay, I'll give you two more minutes.
NOTE CONF
Still, not a lot of people have bought it.
So now we see what?
NOTE CONF
What this is.
Don't miss it.
NOTE CONF
What do you want to do?
Okay, let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
So I think that we are correct.
So that's excellent.
NOTE CONF
This exercise is interesting in some way because this is
a typical example of a function that it is not
NOTE CONF
possible to, to take in the form of y equal
right.
NOTE CONF
So for the circle we say that with a simple
operation we could separate the two arms of the circle.
NOTE CONF
If you write.
In fact we could have done different things.
NOTE CONF
I could have also just considered one quarter of the
circle.
NOTE CONF
That would have also been possible.
But with this function, this is not possible.
NOTE CONF
I cannot bring this in the form of y equal
and so on into to use implicit differentiation.
NOTE CONF
The result is indeed the first, and this is the
way that we find it.
NOTE CONF
So if you look at this, at this calculation, so
the the number, the question, the reply number three was
NOTE CONF
only to bring your attention.
And when we look at this calculation, we need to
NOTE CONF
be careful with taking accounts, all the signs and everything.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The number three is just the correct solution with the
wrong sign.
NOTE CONF
So the process in which we do this is the
usual process.
NOTE CONF
It's the same process that we have seen for the
equation of the circle.
NOTE CONF
This was also quite um yeah.
And there is a typo.
NOTE CONF
It's also quite straightforward.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we we carry on the process and we obtain
this.
NOTE CONF
The only thing which is I mean, if I remember
myself as a student when I was doing this stuff,
NOTE CONF
the only thing that I found difficult about implicit differentiation
is that the calculations were a bit fiddly.
NOTE CONF
That's what I remember.
So the idea is not quite very difficult, but to
NOTE CONF
be able to calculate, to carry on the calculations properly
is a bit fiddly.
NOTE CONF
So my advice would be to do a lot of
exercises.
NOTE CONF
Okay, do a lot of the stock quizzes and do
a lot of the exercises from the book, because that
NOTE CONF
will give you some dexterity with doing these kind of
calculations.
NOTE CONF
Now, of course, I have the d dx and I
could have just oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
No this were not the same.
Sorry they were switched.
NOTE CONF
Sorry I was misreading.
I couldn't quite read the third function.
NOTE CONF
This plain book club is not quite clear.
Okay, now the only thing I wanted to say is
NOTE CONF
that this d dx, which I found is itself a
function, right?
NOTE CONF
I could in principle calculate the derivative that would be
the second derivative of the of the function which I
NOTE CONF
originally had, and I would do this applying implicit differentiation
again.
NOTE CONF
My thinking is that as we go out up with
the degrees of differentiation, this becomes more and more difficult
NOTE CONF
because the algebraic expression becomes more and more difficult.
but I think it's really important to to keep in
NOTE CONF
mind that although we have obtained this dy dx by
applying a procedure, we are going in and with uncertain
NOTE CONF
algebraic movements, if you like, that has given you that
that is an object in itself.
NOTE CONF
And this is something that is really important to remember.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's see next exercise.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I am going to give you 5 or 6
minutes to do this because this is quite.
NOTE CONF
So this is a bit fiddly okay.
So I was trying to.
NOTE CONF
1900.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This is like.
A lot of.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I can see more.
NOTE CONF
There are people still writing, so I'll give you another
minute or so.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Shall we take a look?
NOTE CONF
So that is indeed.
See the correct result.
NOTE CONF
Now this exercise is interesting because it's one of these
exercises that we really cannot do in the form in
NOTE CONF
which we are given it.
So somebody who voted see tells me what are what
NOTE CONF
is the first thing that they did.
it?
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Well, the problem is.
NOTE CONF
The log that's in the power.
So if you take the natural log of both sides,
NOTE CONF
then using log laws, you can, uh, bring the sort
of power down as a coefficient at the front, and
NOTE CONF
then it's much easier to implicitly differentiate.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So I have a logarithm of the exponents and the
exponents that I have no idea what to do with
NOTE CONF
this.
Like really, I have no idea what to do with
NOTE CONF
this, and I need to remember what the rules of
the logarithms of what movements do I know that allow
NOTE CONF
me to make this a bit more accessible?
And as your colleague said, exactly.
NOTE CONF
That's what we need to do.
We take logs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then now we have taken logs, and now this
NOTE CONF
looks already a lot more possible.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Now, just as an aside, we do all these operations,
algebraic operations, these functions.
NOTE CONF
In principle, we should check that it is possible to
do this operation and where it is possible to do
NOTE CONF
these operations.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we have constraints on the X and so on.
For now we just don't do this.
NOTE CONF
We concentrate on the technique of solving this exercise.
But remember that these are all functions which are domain
NOTE CONF
and have range.
And so that would be in principle interesting to know.
NOTE CONF
So now we have taken logs are much.
I am a much happier person.
NOTE CONF
So what is the next thing that I need to
think about.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what is the next?
NOTE CONF
The next action.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Do you want to say here.
Do you want to say it in the market?
NOTE CONF
Those people can't hear here.
You.
NOTE CONF
Know.
Okay, let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
So the next thing I need to do is to
think about what are the laws of the logarithms.
NOTE CONF
Now, I know that there are lots of laws that
regulate how logarithms multiply, divide and add and so on
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
We've seen some of them, I think, on Monday.
NOTE CONF
So now I have that expression and I apply the
laws of the logarithms.
NOTE CONF
And if I apply the laws of the logarithms I
get that.
NOTE CONF
And then I differentiate as you see.
So the the thing that was interesting in this exercise
NOTE CONF
is this idea that once we have a function which
we don't immediately think, oh yes, I can apply this
NOTE CONF
rule or I can do that, we need to think
about what do I know that I can do in
NOTE CONF
order to make this function, so that I can calculate,
in this case the implicit differentiation.
NOTE CONF
And then from there I can just get on with
it.
NOTE CONF
Then I multiplied by y and I find that okay.
Now, this is not going to be always obvious.
NOTE CONF
And as I said before regarding implicit differentiation, these exercises
are not conceptually difficult if you like.
NOTE CONF
They are a bit fiddly, so I would really advise
to do quite a bit of them so you can
NOTE CONF
learn in situations like when I have a logarithm of
the exponent.
NOTE CONF
What do I do?
I take logs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you do a lot of them then you
NOTE CONF
will see that you will apply techniques.
You will acquire techniques that will allow you to solve
NOTE CONF
these exercises quite quickly.
And I think it is important.
NOTE CONF
So if you remember Chris in his first lecture when
he was talking about these kind of procedures, yes, I
NOTE CONF
can stick this in.
Wolfram Alpha and Wolfram Alpha can do it for me.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't take a minute, but it's important to be
able to to carry out this procedure because it is
NOTE CONF
important to be able to check them and see whether
the results I obtain is a result, which is plausible.
NOTE CONF
This is important for mathematics and is important for a
lot of other disciplines, for example statistics.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Next one.
NOTE CONF
What do we do?
I.
NOTE CONF
Think.
You're both in too quickly for me.
NOTE CONF
Give me a break.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there we are.
NOTE CONF
So I am delighted about the result of this vote
because we talked about this on Monday.
NOTE CONF
Who can give me an example of a function that
is continuous, but it has no derivative or whose derivative
NOTE CONF
is not continuous.
I'm not going to ask you to shout.
NOTE CONF
It's not going to work.
What is.
NOTE CONF
It?
Modulus of x.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
We saw this last.
NOTE CONF
We saw this on Monday.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Do you remember on Monday we were talking about the
function mod X.
NOTE CONF
And we were discussing the fact that being continuous is
a necessary condition, but not a sufficient condition even to
NOTE CONF
have a derivative at all.
So let alone having a continuous derivative, in fact, is
NOTE CONF
exactly the example that I have here.
Can anybody think of any other example?
NOTE CONF
Square root of x y.
The derivative will be vulnerable to.
NOTE CONF
Square root of x.
And x can take value zero.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
So if you do the derivative of square root of
NOTE CONF
x, what happens to the function that you obtain as
a derivative is not a continuous.
NOTE CONF
It's not a function which is continuous everywhere.
No.
NOTE CONF
But my go to example is always this.
Well the x okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's really interesting because when you were solving this
example, I saw a lot of people making like gestures
NOTE CONF
with their hands and mapping functions.
When you do this, when you deal with functions, making
NOTE CONF
pictures is really, really important.
But this is important and I think that you will
NOTE CONF
have seen also, I imagine you have seen also in
PES the difference between a necessary and sufficient condition for
NOTE CONF
a theorem.
Have you?
NOTE CONF
You must have done when you have a theorem and
something must happen.
NOTE CONF
But it doesn't guarantee, right?
Like here, a function must be continuous to have a
NOTE CONF
derivative, but is not sufficient.
Okay, let's see what else happens today.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
How can you be.
Quiet.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Thank you so.
Much for joining us today.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
There.
NOTE CONF
Are people.
Who?
NOTE CONF
Are.
Excited.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
For coming.
NOTE CONF
Thank you for joining.
Us today.
NOTE CONF
Thank.
Make?
NOTE CONF
Sure.
You.
NOTE CONF
I.
Think it's.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Should we have a look?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
That's correct.
So the solution is, uh, number two.
NOTE CONF
What is interesting about this, um, this example.
So what is g dash of zero?
NOTE CONF
What mathematical object is?
I don't want to know anything else.
NOTE CONF
What's the rate of change of the function g at
x equals zero?
NOTE CONF
Yes, but what mathematical object is Say it's number.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this is interesting because sometimes some students may be
NOTE CONF
thrown out by the fact that they cannot actually calculate
g of zero because we don't know who g of
NOTE CONF
x is.
But the only thing you need to know about this
NOTE CONF
is that there is a number, right.
So whatever number we are not interested.
NOTE CONF
So if I then get into the idea that g
g dash of zero and zero zero numbers.
NOTE CONF
So I treat them like numbers, then this exercise becomes
quite easy because all what I need to do, I
NOTE CONF
need to.
I only have a product to differentiate there.
NOTE CONF
I have x g of sine of x.
So I have a product and a composition function, which
NOTE CONF
can be the only one that is a little bit
difficult, but I just go in with the rules of
NOTE CONF
differentiation.
I can differentiate that.
NOTE CONF
And so I find that that's the derivative of that.
If you do the product and then you do the
NOTE CONF
composition of function, because sine of g of x is
a composition of function.
NOTE CONF
And then you find that and then you calculate that
at zero.
NOTE CONF
Of course when you calculate that at zero, anything that
trigonometric function that goes zero and zero disappears.
NOTE CONF
And you and you find the second solution.
So when you have exercises of this sort, don't get
NOTE CONF
confused by the fact that you don't know what the
function g is.
NOTE CONF
So you cannot calculate g of g in this case
g dash of zero.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
It doesn't really matter.
NOTE CONF
It's a number and all.
What matters in solving exercises like this is that that
NOTE CONF
is a number and a treated like a number.
And that's how I write it is minus sine of
NOTE CONF
g of zero, whatever number that may be.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's do the oh gosh okay.
Let's do the last one.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Thank.
You.
NOTE CONF
Very.
Much.
NOTE CONF
Thank.
You.
NOTE CONF
For.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is amazing.
Honestly.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What is this?
NOTE CONF
What have you done?
Somebody.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Chain rule.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
This is all what there is.
NOTE CONF
You have that function that, um, where you need to,
um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
What?
NOTE CONF
You need to apply the the chain rule because you
have the g of x.
NOTE CONF
If I have g of f of x, g of
x in this case would be um, the square root
NOTE CONF
of x and f of x would be x.
So if I think about applying the chain rule, then
NOTE CONF
this is what I would find.
Pretty straightforward.
NOTE CONF
So in conclusion for this lecture today.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
On Monday we have seen some ideas which are a
little bit more conceptual.
NOTE CONF
Regarding the derivative.
So things like when the derivative exists.
NOTE CONF
And so on and so forth.
We have talked about limits and how to calculate it.
NOTE CONF
So today we have done a little bit more about
how to solve these exercises.
NOTE CONF
These are pretty straightforward exercises once you know what you
are looking for.
NOTE CONF
And there are a few things that you need to
keep in mind.
NOTE CONF
You need to keep in mind the rules of the
logarithms you need to keep in mind.
NOTE CONF
The rules of differentiation.
Both differentiation of known functions like logarithms.
NOTE CONF
Square roots, and so on.
But also the rules of composition and product of functions.
NOTE CONF
And then you will have no problem in solving these
exercises.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do you have any questions?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'll see you.
NOTE CONF
I'll see you week five, actually.
Now, when you take this.
NOTE CONF
So.
I want to show.
NOTE CONF
You.
And now.
NOTE CONF